I think it's worth to pay attention to
to native relapse. I think it's it's
worth to believe strongly that this is
uh this is very important path. Uh it's
worth to also be be cautious and
understand that uh even in that world
they all the other L2 structures remain
extremely important.
Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast where we ask your
favorite builders the questions you wish
you could ask yourself. This is a
production of neonnewstoday.com and I'm
your host Dylan Garbowski. In this
episode, we're joined by Tomas Stanchek,
the co-executive director at the
Ethereum Foundation, an entity that
supports the development, research, and
growth of the Ethereum blockchain
ecosystem by providing funding,
technical resources, and community
building. In this conversation, we
discussed the Ethereum Foundation's new
outlook on empowering teams and
builders, the surprising amount of pros
to the co-leership model, how Tomas
empowered teams within the EF to take
control over their swim lanes, the
balance of using token price as a signal
while focusing on development and
growth, the EF's relationship with L2s,
institutional onboarding, and so much
more. Just a reminder, nothing said on
this podcast is a solicitation to buy or
sell any tokens and that the guest or
host might hold tokens discussed in any
given episode. You can check out a full
disclaimer at www.newtoday.com.
And if you enjoyed this episode, please
rate and review it on your favorite
podcasting platform. And don't forget to
share with friends and family. Every
rating, review, like, and comment helps
us reach more people and bring you more
of your favorite guests. With all that
said, I really enjoyed this conversation
with Tomas, and I hope you enjoy it,
too. Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast. Today, I am super
psyched to be joined by Tomas Stancheek,
the founder of Nethermind, and now the
co-executive director at the Ethereum
Foundation. How you doing today, Tamas?
>> Great. Hi, everyone. Thank you for
having me. It's a busy days. So, it's
grace but it's busy days because we're
thinking about a lot of topics. It's
thinking about the structure next year,
finalizing budgets, uh some last minute
decisions, you know, with some some
discussions that took maybe two or three
months and now I just culminating with
those most uh most challenging points.
>> Yeah, we're at this interesting point in
time. We're recording just before the
holidays. So, the end of the year kind
of gets busy and then we also just
wrapped up Dev Connect. So there's
probably a lot of loose ends that need
to be tied up from the relationships
built there. So um again, thank you so
much for your time today. Um just kind
of like jumping into this. Um it's you
have a really interesting background in
that you come from like the trady space
with CME Group and City. So what was the
moment in which you kind of like
stumbled on this crazy blockchain space
and what was the the time where you went
aha this is where I really need to be
and where I want to be building? Yeah, I
think even even before starting with
traditional finance when I was still
mostly seeing my career in the future as
something related to to computer
science, I was definitely over and over
again interested at some minor topic on
the edge of uh of the mainstream media
that were related to to privacy to the
abbitive rebellions and so on. I never
felt that I was part of it in any way or
or were maybe too too much aligned with
oh this is the basic scenario I planned
a career with uh with the corporations I
would I would definitely think of the
global brands as something that was
inspiring me at that time to to try and
it's just I didn't do enough searching
out there like on the on the side of
things so the different paths and um
2016 or 15 is sometime when I when I
thought I'll go to a Bitcoin meetup in
in London. Uh I was at the time at City
Bank. I was working at the FX3 U desk
technology side. So uh I was team
responsible for pricing FX forwards uh
for the G10 and also emerging markets.
Um I was I was building pricing systems
there and I thought it would be great to
learn more about actually bitcoin
cryptocurrencies
uh since since it's so close to FX
markets and I one afternoon I went for
the for the meetup and that's where I
learned about Ethereum and suddenly I
realized oh there's there's something
that connects everything that I was
always interested with but um somehow
never never really dig deeper into that.
So I I looked at suddenly at economy,
game theory, the finance world,
technology
um and a bit like future of society. So
that was uh that was very very
interesting to keep digging like so to
read all the news and and it was my next
one or two years and it was more and
more and more and it's story of many
people in in blockchain. nothing unique.
Obviously, we we stumble upon this and
then suddenly we realize why why I
haven't read more about it. Oh, this
part is brilliant. This part is
brilliant. Oh, this is alo always
something that I was interested in. I
thought it doesn't exist. Um and yeah,
2017 uh in the meantime I I switched
jobs. I joined a a hedge fund called
Rokus Capital and I continued being
interested in global markets at that
time. Uh still very much a technologist
in 2017. I started the mind and uh I was
practicing on my own building and uh for
a few months and then some people
started joining and helping to to build
and uh I started building Ethereum
client implementation software um just
because I wanted to understand and the
internals were building some systems for
for trading. So I think what I wanted to
build at the time was something like my
personal auto trading systems that maybe
I would later share with others and that
would be something like a bit comparable
to searching as like onchain trading as
well. Ether delta was at that time. So I
wanted to understand ether delta and for
that I started building the client
implementation and I just couldn't stop
uh and ended up building much of the
like infrastructure for ethereum because
none of the mind is nowadays one of the
leading atrium clients and uh much of
the early codebase was was written by me
probably 80 90% of the early codebase
>> nice um I just read a really great
institutional report that was put
together by L2B um nethermind and
ethereal realize and it's really cool to
kind of see this ecosystem kind of being
able to to share the message for what
Ethereum is and be able to kind of like
talk the talk that that Wall Street
understands. When you look at reports
like this and you look at what your
peers are working on at Nethermind, do
you kind of miss being in that space? Do
you miss the the job role and and being
able to get your hands dirty and to
build? No, I think that uh I'm still
there. I mean this is always that
transition between coding all the time
and solving problems and then moving
somewhere to research and being focused
more on on products and applications on
the ecosystem.
I think for all of us it's like you look
back and you think when it happened like
uh when did I started going 50% less or
50% less again and again and then as you
as you're running management level tasks
it's very obvious very natural to pick
up every few months the situation where
you have to slow down do some research
read things analyze things maybe uh
maybe launch a few projects on on your
machine or on cloud and and test them
yourself. So yeah, I was doing that
recently. Okay, not so recently. I say
um last year I was running like some
full set of some of the L2s on my
machine. Uh so I I set up the entire tao
uh docker compose and then world and and
something else and again I started
experimenting with AI. So if you don't
do that all the time then at some point
you start talking about things that you
no longer understand how they evolved.
Uh so I don't miss it because I think I
still do it and uh some of it is in the
form of of research or working very
closely with people that I used to work
with. Uh and I think the rest the
management that's something that I could
choose to long time ago. So, how do you
how do you feel that the kind of
experience that you amassed at running
Nethermind and doing all the research
that you just spoke about and your time
at Flashbots and everything else
previously in your career has kind of
like helped culminate to prepare you for
the things you need to do at the
Ethereum Foundation? And what are some
of the the kind of like new crazy fires
that have popped up that you never
imagined in your previous roles you
would have to be dealing with today?
>> Sure. Uh when I think about flash boats
that in mind also there were other
things obviously. So the board at
Starknet and uh twin stick so staking
solutions uh institutional staking and
uh and D5 protocol oiler and and fora on
the security side. So if you take all of
this together, it's really good
representation of everything related to
infrastructure maybe slightly less on
the application side. Although at the
moment we've been building applications
also around tokenization around the um
D5 protocols um
the I used to travel a lot because of
flashbots and then mind I decided to to
start spending more time in Asia. Um I
did start working more with researchers.
So I'd say it's really good
representation across all of those
different teams and uh there's not that
much novelty when moving to the
foundation internally. Um the culture
might be slightly different but not not
that different as people would imagine
like the the sizes of the organizations
are similar between Nethermind and uh
and the Turan foundation it's head wire
it's around 250 people each um and this
always defines a bit of like the
managerial challenges the operational
challenges the communication challenges
within the organization so so this seems
to uh similar then understanding the way
the teams like flashbots operated in
collaborations with various researchers.
That's uh that's also that helps you to
understand how to work with teams that
are very independent the centralized
um researchers here researchers there
and
yeah I think what was unexpected
some of the internals but not not that
much like somehow how the how the things
were constructed on the on the
communication side on the internal
communication side of the foundation. Um
and also maybe I know which part for
sure the policy part is something where
I where I was least prepared for. So
it's great that we have a fantastic
policy lead now Conor Polyski and that's
foundation people were experienced to to
explore it to understand it. So I'm
learning here and it's progressing.
What's really interesting that you know
we're talking about the the nuances of
of what's happening at the Ethereum
Foundation and and how you feel that a
lot hasn't changed from the outside
looking in. There's been a big shift in
momentum and a big shift in kind of
perception about what's going on at the
EF. But before we kind of like delve
into all of that, um I am wearing the
shirt I got at Devcon and this was your
first Dev Connect or EF event where you
were co-executive director. So, what was
it like kind of being uh I don't want to
say like the emerging star at at the
show, but what was your your experience
like boots on the ground um you know
representing the EF now at DevConnect?
>> Sure. Devconnect luckily there were
there were so many stars because uh it's
a it's a very much properly
decentralized system. Ethereum and the
community and uh and the industry like
has many many leaders that were stars
there and obviously many were many of
them like clearly much more bright stars
and like for it with longer longer
history and much more influential so
that's uh that means that I was not that
much in the center of attention or busy
and also the stars the real stars were
organizers of the uh of the dev connect
so Nathan and his team. They done
amazing job. Obviously, there were some
challenges, but uh but generally
um we could be worried about some things
uh ahead of the connect but uh but it
ended up having everything that was
important. So like the the good vibe uh
lots of people uh lots of great talks um
lots of feeling of uh unity. I think it
was very important for us to to reject
the message that was maybe a year or two
years ago that um that it's all side
events that it doesn't feel like it is
together. Uh so there were some subtle
things that we really cared about to to
invite LDL2s to be in the center of the
venue. Um to make sure they will make
more invitations to like even as this
def connect that the to be the venue
where you see lots of talks um to this
side to invite much more applications
and have more applications and uh use
case tracks rather than just
infrastructure and research. uh and here
to address the the things related to uh
to the fact that Ethereum foundation
very often would be seen as like
research lab and Ethereum to be
sometimes over focusing on the research
and intro. So, we addressed all of this
and now coming back to your question
about about me and how it felt. I I
really had enough time to just walk
around the venue and uh and drink some
coffee and have a nonut here and there
and some empanadas and uh randomly talk
with people at the booths and and see
what they're building, not be
recognized. So, that's that's super
nice. I don't think that uh that people
like Vitalik or many others have uh have
any of that uh opportunity to just uh to
just uh disappear in the crowd. So it
was great. It it felt like it should
feel and uh and also obviously important
meetings with uh in in Latin America
were happening before and during dev
connect. to Brazil, Argentina. Uh I had
pleasure to attend Eflatam before. I I
had lots of meetings with industry
financial industry but also like the
builders in Brazil. um similarly in
Argentina and that helps to understand
the the local challenges, the economies,
opportunities there and to start
building strategy that uh that can make
like those simple gentle touches and
encouragement and optification to to
help people really get full potential.
Yeah, I've been really exploring the the
intersection of LATAM and blockchain and
crypto and what are the different
regions of LATAM that are served by the
different tools that blockchain and
crypto offer remittances um access to
payments and stable coins and things of
that nature. And it really feels like
this is a region of the world that is up
and coming when it comes to how this
technology is going to be implemented
and adopted. So, it was really cool to
visit Dev Connect and it gave me a great
reason to to visit Buenositis and in
Argentina. Um, so shout out to the team
for hosting it there. Also, I just want
to give a personal anecdote. Um, one of
my buddies is building the Pistachio app
and he said that you and the Ethereum
Foundation just really had a hands-on
relationship with reaching out and
bringing applications into the event and
creating a home, a space for
applications to have a booth at the
event. And typically events of this
size, booths cost tens of thousands of
dollars. for a project that's
bootstrapping, this might not be
feasible for them to have a booth and to
have access. So, I just the anecdote I
just want to throw out there and share
is that it's really kind of inspiring to
see a foundation kind of go down to the
grassroots and reach out to upand
cominging projects and up and cominging
teams and give them a voice and give
them a space to kind of share what
they're working on. Is this by design or
is this just something you do naturally?
>> I think I I wonder obviously if you're
asking about the foundation. So we've
spent a lot of time this year to to
design this massive outreach or like
massive processing of inbound and not
being not spending too much time and
like filtering and selecting but
building that foldering selection from
who engages and when you continue
helping them do they move forward. So
sometimes when you have grunt systems,
they are designed to spend too much time
thinking, overthinking about decisions
and not letting people to just like move
like that's what we want. Like the
really the way you want founders to move
is for them to to always be on the run
forward like they to to just search
where the money comes the fastest and
don't worry. So if you create a grant
systems that makes them wait for like
months for you to decide is it really
like worth it or not then then you kind
of kill the spirit of moving forward
very fast. So we built the founders
success team. We've built the
application support team. We
restructured our grant systems to be
focused on uh introductions mentoring
introductions to capitals to alternative
funding sources and encouragement to
build and to be visible.
uh we've restructured our social media
like approach to to give more space and
visibility to to everyone who wanted to
be visible and were building something
interesting in Ethereum. Um so you know
like aum account on Twitter has millions
of followers I think four millions plus
and when you can feature builders defa
applications then it starts being
visible and now I was thinking that okay
so there might be tens of thousands of
applications but some that would be
actively reaching for support at the
given moment it might be in thousands so
at some point you have to be able to
exhaust that uh that number it's uh it's
not in millions So if you really have a
team that is focused on on rushing and
helping everyone and being responsive
then you can respond everyone and help
them and then suddenly it should be
slowing down in the in the amount of
problems that you have to resolve
because people learn to each from each
other on on how to move things fast. So
hopefully Devcon connect was also one of
the results of all of the small small
changes in the attitude of the
foundation and Ethereum ecosystem like
helping helping everyone without too
much of thinking am I making a mistake
here are they ready are they fully
technically prepared and so on so uh but
also we brought fantastic people to
support it and and they bring that
spirit so entire founder success team
the the devil communication it's
top-notch and it also brings that vibe.
They they're visible. They're more
visible. They go to universities, they
go to events, they they record videos,
they they're active on social medias.
>> So, I think maybe one of the biggest
changes that I saw almost initially when
when you and Shawei were announced as
the the new leads of the Ethereum
Foundation was this kind of presence on
social media. If you go back to a lot of
the frustrations that people were having
in Q4 of last year and even in Q1 of
this year, it's that a lot of people
felt like EF wasn't necessarily
communicating well. The Twitter account
was a little off maybe is the best way
to put it. There was no really kind of
internal highlighting of the successes
of uh the developers within the
ecosystem or projects and products that
were launching on top of Ethereum. So
maybe this is kind of an openended
question, but there were a lot of strong
opinions that led into the shakeup of
leadership. And from your perspective,
what do you think was kind of the the
final straw that broke the camel's back?
What was what was it in December,
January, February where EF figured this
is the time to make a change and we want
to do this? Well, to my understanding,
the the foundation was aware that it
needs the leadership change that uh that
the board was preparing for it. It just
was taking them longer time to to find
the right person that was ready to um to
take that position and uh I imagine the
many leaders that that would be great.
Stan foundation are just like extremely
busy uh building very successful
applications or infrastructure projects
and uh and I happened to be ready to say
oh yeah I was planning some transition
around the mind where I knew I knew who
would take over as a CEO and uh and some
other projects were at the stage when
again I was not that critically busy. So
it felt oh yeah that's the right moment
and but for the foundation it probably
was difficult because Donny Ryan was
leaving but his started materialized
right and uh and that's great that's uh
that's extremely uh successful high
visibility project um obviously still
like the success will be measured in the
long-term impact the products that they
will deliver but I I strongly believe
that that's the team that will deliver a
lot and um and then we cannot say that
there was like series of events that
invoked that leadership change but uh
just foundation took a bit longer and
then everyone felt like it was just one
after another comments together were
coming and forcing people to to make
changes. Uh I think even the the planned
foundation offsite that was happening in
March was already planned like months
before and was assumed that it will be
opportunity for the new leadership to uh
to present or communicate and I was
joining just just before the offsite.
I think a lot of people had if we look
back at the track record we're we're
recording mid December right now and I
think anybody can say that we've seen
nothing but positive drive coming from
the EF side but I remember at the time
there was a lot of concerns and
consternations around like a bifurcated
leadership model having two co-executive
directors so what have been kind of the
the positives that have come from this
model how do you feel that that you've
benefited from having a co-executive
director.
>> Yeah, it's a lot of work, you know, the
management side where you have both the
and it's for for every leader, I guess.
If you're CEO, if you're in the
management, uh people will see how you
communicate when you talk about strategy
or vision. If you're if you're busy with
vision and strategy, uh people will see
your communication, social media, your
presence at the events and so on. And
that's like the what you talk that
you're going to do. But then also you
have the organization internally. So,
and it's all the different decisions.
It's like the the conflicts in the
teams, the uh the budgeting, the
compensation, the the processes, the
structure, the hiring, the talent level.
Um and this is a lot a lot of work and I
think that in many organizations if you
stop seeing the leader then it means
that they are very busy internally and
the the benefit that we have is that
when I'm maybe seen more often
communicating so probably you'll see me
more on podcast and showway uh more at
the events more traveling at the same
time there is like awful lot of the of
the internal challenges and show is very
often deal with those which gives me a
lot of space to to be present and uh
sometimes it's uh probably creates the
impression that uh that I'm busy with uh
lots of heavy work but the truth is that
much much of heavy lifting is done by
show internally um and you know the
there's always challenge I guess with
the co leadership but we've uh we've
discussed that very early in the process
we said how we how we approach it we
said whoever takes decisions earlier
takes the decision
uh so it wouldn't be like you know the
the two people having to agree on
everything but simply we keep running uh
there's some situations when we start
discussing things more but uh but at the
moment as we going through budget and
some structuring uh I think show is much
more busy in the last week or two after
defcon connect uh I might have been
sometimes more busy on the on the road
and like in the middle of the year I
guess people will not chase you about
the budgets about structure after uh
some people are on holidays. Uh so it's
a it's a good support from each other
like sometimes sometimes since one of us
is busier uh sometimes the other one uh
we generally have good agreement
majority of the things when we disagree
we can talk uh so so it works uh I think
yeah like I see I see because I told you
like there is a busy time with the with
the budgets with the compensation
reviews with um the planning for the
next year uh I think now I
I'm spending a lot of time just just
thinking of like what the next year is.
How do we plan to communicate what we're
going to do in 2026, but
uh Michelle is taking probably like
hundreds of calls daily with people
internally to to help them plan the
budgets and finalize the things.
>> I think you there's a little bit of
humility when you say that you came into
the EF and there was already like a good
structure there from the outside looking
in. Many might say that the the the
organization look was chaotic. There was
organized chaos. And one of the kind of
really
powerful things that have stuck out
particularly as the wheels have really
started uh the wheel of momentum has
really started to pick up is that
there's now this
story there's this energy and this vibe
that's emerging from the EF. And when
you look at um creators like Louie and
you have voices like Benji, you're
really starting to see this kind of
fresh energy that's that's coming out
from within the foundation. And I don't
think that that was just going to
randomly happen. I think that there's a
design in the org chart that was created
to empower that. So what were some of
like the broader restructurings?
What were some of the new teams that
were put into into place? I really want
to highlight the the product success
team, the founder success team, and also
this kind of like narrative team is just
what I'll loosely call them with the
folks that are coming out. Um, there's a
lot of strong consensus that's forming
around these teams. And it's a it's a
very big positive that like if you go on
CT, crypto Twitter, you'll see people
talking positively about this. So was
that kind of already in the works or did
you and Shawei kind of push that ball
and and get that momentum started?
>> So I think that now if I review the last
few few months and to to really give
credit to many people and uh I would
probably miss many contributions. So
sorry for that if you if you feel it
contributed greatly. Uh but in April
like one of the early meetings so they
had this uh at this offsite the
foundation offsite I I was walking
around and I was bumping into people
they felt like oh they like have so much
energy and they have some vision some of
them were moving to other teams like
sometimes it was they were joining in
sometimes sometimes they decided to
leave to start some some projects of
their own and I was asking them question
like who hired you who hired you and
almost in many many cases people were
saying I was James Smith was James Smith
I like I went to J Smith I said uh like
you you're a challenge for people and I
said like would you would you be able to
to help me to understand the structure
on the on the ecosystem development side
and uh and then the one decision
suggested to to the management was to
give James ability to restructure in the
entire ecode and
there's that pleasure of delegation when
you can find one person and say like
just you know just take this huge part
of the foundation and um and I I feel I
trust you like from this conversation
from the way how you talk about the
vision and and I remember at that time
we there's lots of uh skepticisms here
and there like with everyone who kind of
is not yet clearly in the leadership
position and the high level and people
some some interacted and you don't don't
see from people what really blocks them
on but doesn't allow them to to deliver
everything that he would like to. Um and
then we agreed that he'll have time to
like I think it was 10th of June and and
he said okay and just without really
many conversations only within a month
or two he he brought like 15 to 20 hires
uh and and now you see those people you
see Louis you see Abas you see the
entire founder success team uh you see
Benji you see uh it's not only James
like at the same time because we started
communicating more so I I think people
like uh Josh Stark, people like Josh
Biteser started being more active in in
saying yes to things and talking more
about the foundation, communicating
more, giving more space to to the
application. So definitely the social
media rewriting was George Stark and him
uh uh bringing Emily on board and and I
think Benji and Louie really came from
the efforts of uh Bastian on the
management side and and Josh Rudolph. So
I I would say we have some like this uh
people that are really capable of
bringing great talent particularly I
think that Justin Drake and Jim Smith a
great created this many many other
leaders at the foundation uh but I
remember when I brought on board the
head of talent RP uh she's uh like the
head of talent role at the foundation is
more of thinking of how to help the
entire ecosystem to make sure that the
talent stays circulates and comes to the
Ethereum ecosystem and not not only
talking about the talent and hiring at
the foundation. So thinking of if
somebody decides to learn at the
foundation and move on how how to make
sure that they have this fe as an career
step the plan that they can build
something even larger independency
and uh I I told RP like if if James or
Justin want to hire like just just let
them hire because this are fantastic
people hiring uh top talent and uh and
now we see the results of it. So on the
communications and many other people
contributed but uh James really
structured the entire echo death. So uh
I think it's very important for people
to notice him to see him as a as a very
strong figure at the foundation and the
ethereum ecosystem. Uh I think that
James now being maybe this busy with
structuring things uh is more active and
if you can give him a follow that's
great. Uh, I don't remember. He has like
the Twitter handle. I think it was Snap
Tropical, Snap Crafter, or something
like that.
>> I've already slapped him with a follow.
Um, I just, and I'm not even necessarily
asking you to touch on this topic, but I
just want to use it as um kind of like a
a metric for the success that I've seen
come from this kind of internal
reinvigoration of pride from the EF. Um,
last week Salana Breakpoint happened and
some statistics were thrown around that
may or may not have been misleading. We
don't have to jump into this, but what I
really take notice for in the strength
of people who believe in the ecosystem
that they build in is who's going to
step up and who's going to defend and
who's going to fight back for what
they're working on and what they believe
in. And when you look at a lot of the
responses, there was a lot of passion
and and fact-based responses as well,
but there was a lot of passion that was
coming from people who were working
within the EF. And I don't think you
would have seen that a year ago. So,
it's it's really cool to kind of see
this personal pride, this this
subjective integrity kind of like take
off and you see all the different arms
and people that are contributing to the
EF really feel that they are so
passionate and they love what they're
working on so much that they want to
stand up and they want to say something.
So, we don't have to touch on why or
what or how or who said what. I just use
that as like a metric to to follow
what's happening and it's just like all
signs pointing to the right direction
and growth. The beauty behind crypto and
blockchain is that for the first time in
history as part of the tech stack, we
have an economic model that's built into
it. We have code and then we have tokens
and tokens can be traded on secondary
markets. So as much as the developer and
the builder and the engineer never wants
to talk about token price, it is
something that we have to keep in in the
back of our minds because there are
people who participate in this ecosystem
who that's what they focus on and it's
inherently a part of the tech stack that
we're using to build. So, how do you
kind of walk the tight rope of paying
attention to token price and the
sentiment that maybe token holders have
on crypto Twitter and maybe not like
using that as your north star for the
why for what you do, but how do you walk
the the tight rope of paying attention
to price and sentiment and also kind of
like directing development and curating
the long-term direction of an ecosystem.
>> So, you know, like the our our own
budgets are affected by by Eve uh by Eve
price, right? So, we we pay attention to
understand how to how to structure plan
the budget for for the organization.
Foundation holds 240,000
E I think. So, so this around $700
million now and and this is yeah like
overwhelming majority of what we like
rest is fiat positions that are uh
they're just like long-term securing the
uh all the payments like for two and a
half years that's the plan you've seen
the treasury policy from the foundation
so so definitely we have to pay
attention and also the second thing that
you mentioned is the sentiment uh when
you when you analyze the the behavior of
the industry of the ecosystem system. If
the prices of tokens uh on the exchanges
go down, then you know that some teams
get stressed, they maybe their budgets
get uh restructured, they they make
cuts, they cannot execute. So, so you
immediately know that some fear appears,
right? That I some people will be less
likely to take risks, reluctant to
deliver some projects like thinking of
what really is not necessary.
uh and and you know that some of those
changes might be immediately affecting
people's uh people's feelings, right? So
if you go to events, I I'm joking that I
always write the content for the talks
like a day before, which means that
usually it's just black text and white
screen because we we don't have to time
to send it to designers. But but at the
same time, you don't make mistakes
usually of of not feeling the mood of
people that you're talking to, right?
Like that you you always feel fresh with
this a bit of ambient situation of what
people currently think is important.
Whether now you talk to everyone's
energy about building because they think
like I can do everything. There's no
risk. I have resources for everything. I
can explore. I can research. I want to
ship. or some other day you you walk
into the room and everyone is thinking
like will I be able to build anything uh
is it even going anywhere so people are
very emotional so if you if you don't
follow that then uh then it's hard to to
lean and continue the communication the
second thing is like uh we mentioned
this as a norm and so on so this this is
non-existent in the foundation is like
to think uh that that we somehow drive
it but we it is important for us to
understand uh how how the token well
token the Eve ether is um h how it is
enshrined and connected with all the uh
all the aspects of the security of the
protocol uh and then obviously people
ask questions about the the fees from L2
the the L1 phase about the burning rate
about the issuance and so on and all of
that affects the the security incentives
for for various participants whether
it's validators whether it's blog
builders whether it's uh and other
infrastructure components or relayer
solvers the e economic activity on chain
all of this defines uh
their incentives and then it tells you
okay those incentives disappear uh is
there any risk to the permissionlessness
of the protocol to the security of the
protocol and so so this uh this is why
the researchers at the f obviously look
at everything together and uh and they
have to pay attention as
And then you have the entire ecosystem
industry that tries to define uh what
are what are the models that define that
security uh that that place if ether in
in all of the vision of uh where
Ethereum goes and uh we've talked to
many people about it obviously and uh
and I think this is a great disagreement
and uh uh In the end for for many of us
like the the the seeing ether as like
just the fundamental aspect of the
future security and the economy and
collateralization and being used and on
Ethereum that becomes global where all
the digital assets and the tokenization
happens. uh this for me feels like the
the most consistent
uh carrier of the of the security of the
network and the incentives to all the
infrastructure uh participants that
secure the network and uh and the other
models that like try to look at uh
Ethereum as some kind of
company or revenue model. They they
think like this just describes something
that is super short term and not really
representing the the entire movement and
revolution and the uh and the the depth
of the meaning of of what we're building
and what we're changing. Uh they do
define very often the the success on the
demand side and the activity. So they
they do demand whether whether we really
have impact whether we have users and
that's why it matters. So, uh it's just
that the thing is
sometimes you say, "Oh, the the fees to
Ethereum dropped because uh because
there's less users and then there's
worry worry." But then the other times
you'll see, oh, the fees dropped because
the block capacity increased and there
is temporary that the entire demand
didn't yet react uh to start using the
the chain. And then you say, well,
that's that's okay. That's perfect
because we decreased the price for the
users. Um and my expectation is simply
the demand will always in the in the
long term or the meet to longterm will
catch up with the supply of the network.
It's just that people are adjusting to
to build more on L1. People feel more
confidence about building on the one
also people feel more confidence to
launch more L2s and to load a lot of
activity on L2s. Uh hence everything
that we do on scaling side will always
find the the increased flaw the
increased um revenue to the validators
the operators uh increased burning and
so on and um like if we scale 10x and uh
we on the way there let's say that we
scaled 2x this year but there are really
really promising uh designs
technological designs that talk about 5x
more next year. Um, so as long as the
demand for the block space catches up
and I'm pretty sure it does and and we
see now the increased increased interest
in the in the L1 building on L1 tapping
into the liquidity desk on L1 and also
the large enough and uh meaningful
enough institutional projects that
always will choose L1 over L2s uh while
at the same time there is massively
growing L2 activity. So all of that
together leads to this demand immunity
feeling not immunity but like over time
feeling the all the new supply and uh
that means that in general the the
network will be more and more successful
and see more use it. I think if you look
back from like the post 2022 era when
the rollup centric roadmap really
started to take off um it was a
necessity to have L2s remove activity on
the L1 because of the surge in fees and
then while immediately we saw this
relief and people were really happy you
kind of like go into the bare market and
then everyone turns and they're mad at
the L2s because it's it's it's vampire
attacking the value of ETH on the L1. 1.
And so while we needed to have these L2s
to alleviate the pressure that was on
the L1, now you start having this
narrative kind of like snowball and
compound into another direction where
L2s are bad. L2s are vampiric to to
Ethereum as an L1 and you know they have
their own tokens. So there's a lot of
these kind of like economic incentives
for people to have hot takes and you can
appine on on whether the tokens acrudeed
value or took value away from ETH or
not. But what I'm interested in hearing
about is the the relationship with L2s
that you view that the foundation and
that Ethereum should have because we
have now this road map for native and
based rollups for the Ethereum
interoperability layer and we're
starting to think about how in the next
few years we can really tie the token
economic models and activity of L2s back
to the L1 so that there can be um
flywheel effects that are sent to ETH
the asset. So without talking about how
ETH will acrewue in price or whatever I
want to hear more about what's your
perspective about the form the types and
forms of relationships that you view the
EF should have with L2s and are are they
good are L2s good? Do we want them? Does
the EF want to have a strong
relationship with each of the L2s?
Uh so we are very much committed to the
uh L2 related road map and uh we try to
put a lot of effort we do put a lot of
effort into ensuring that uh that we
understand the challenges and
opportunities that are with twos that we
understand their technological
innovations. Um we we have a few
initiatives that are very much related
to 2. So the the entire interrupt uh
space is about making sure the users can
very um very easily uh move the assets
fans uh make calls between the L2s and
what uh then there is obviously set of
uh set of initiatives that are
independent of the foundation but
supported by the foundation like L2 beat
that uh give space for like auditing and
categorization of different L2s that
helps institutions a lot to choose where
to
uh and it helps to incentivize people to
to think about security of their
networks and to to make improvements.
Now the other things is that now now we
preparing um a significant event that
will be for for engineers and
researchers of all the different L2s and
the goals that we have are following. So
we want the new L2s that appeared in
Asia. to think about uh X layer, think
about Jo, uh think about various like
large e-commerce uh projects in uh in
China that are launching their L2s. Uh
think about Giwa from a bit. So these
are super exciting projects in Asia that
uh very often when we ask them what you
care about the most they said like we
would like to be really connected with
the Ethereum ecosystem and first like
when you see those announcements oh like
China is building L2 or the um the the
major exchange in Asia is building L2
then in the west people don't feel it
entirely they think like oh but will it
be really part of the ecosystem and then
go there and say we want to be connected
and the moment where I've heard it that
that's really the problem is that we
want to get connected. We started
thinking how we do it best and the event
that we organizing will be bringing
probably like 100 to 150 people that are
researchers engineers so they can
exchange the ideas on technology on the
direction on um just know each other and
scale better uh and secure the network
better and work on interop and and I'm
very excited about that one. So
uh we created a team or simply like
initiative at the foundation that is uh
is related to like Ethereum as a
platform for launching uh L2s and making
sure that the L1 becomes really this
primary place where where people think
that's we want it to be center for like
settlement for liquidity for the L2s and
we know that obviously when we're
launching a new chain we're launching as
an L2 on Ethereum um so that team is is
active Now then the other things is we
do receive feedback some twos are very
unhappy right they they say oh
foundation
doesn't really like give us the the
space or like the ecosystem is not
friendly for us and it's always a
question of where where you allocate
your attention like when you go to
Twitter there will be people that will
say terrible things there will be people
that will tell you that you're the best
in the world I like that you just keep
doing what you're doing and uh you have
to discard both and are the into account
buff like I listen to to a critique and
that
>> when you discard those uh when you
discard take into account this extreme
voices then the both cases probably
you're a bit wiser and at least really
relates to like where they where they
choose to listen uh where they they show
initiative to to be friendly because
Ethereum Foundation for now for sure is
friendly to all the L2s and we invite
them to to work together to announce
together uh we invite them to is um like
result of the efforts that we execute
around the world on on bringing top
businesses and builders to to understand
how much they can trust Ethereum, what
level of security they get. They will
start explaining how to uh how to work
on different O2s. We'll probably start
certifying solutions providers. Uh
that's one of the ideas for 2026 to to
build the system for uh for telling who
who can explain you like how to build an
Ethereum very complex products like
privacy solutions Y2 solutions
and LM means that that willingness is
there from the Ethereum foundation. So
it's it's a matter of of choice how to
how to best structure that in all the
different situations. There's lots of
L2s. uh we pay attention to to all of
them but uh depending on the situation
always it feels like m maybe for a
moment it feels like we're favoring one
or the other just because some events
that happen on the to like we we want to
talk about and get excited but then we
continuously look for for more
excitement so um and there's lots
there's lots so recently for example Zik
Singh was announcing the uh the
combination of the liquidity from the
layer 1 uh to be easily the borrows to
the L2. And I think this is is beautiful
example of of L2 really showing the
strong commitments to uh to building on
Ethereum and and integrating with
Ethereum very closely.
very excited about this
many more obviously now you know uh
after after this podcast and everyone
who wasn't mentioned probably a bit more
but then I hope that it works as an
encouragement to to make big
announcements and be integrations and be
friendly and reach out to us and say
this is what we're doing can you retweet
uh we love it when it happens like when
L2 sends us something and says like this
this this work we care about it um
there's a story of Cello that moved from
from being L1 on and and came back as an
L2 on Ethereum and it's it's a beautiful
story of this year and they have uh like
a lots of users and lots of success with
very important projects on identity and
uh on payment systems and uh and polygon
obviously. So here you know of with
polygon we have that challenge where
much of the ecosystem is like struggling
to to categorize and define polygon
because it's not the typical L2 uh
structure but uh historically it has
like really really strong impact
positive impact on on the innovation and
on bringing users to the Ethereum
ecosystem to EVM ecosystem. So uh and
I'm super happy about Defcon uh heading
to to India. Uh I think that uh sure
Polygon is is uh international but has
lots of roots in uh Indian community and
uh definitely brought on board uh but
millions of users in India. Uh so I
think this will be great opportunity to
be active together there as well. uh and
many many more you know like uh you see
uh I think the last last week we have
this a bit of a drama here and there
about like startnet and uh and ethereum
communication interior foundation
communication uh we put a lot of effort
to to showcase like how much innovation
came from startnet how much we excited
about BTCI
uh the other challenge there is start is
nonem so so suddenly it also activates
engineers you know the engineers when
they actually start getting excited
about the the conflict this is because
they use different technologies and
they're really opinionated about what
technologies like to use. Uh so in all
the other cases engineers are super
super cool and it's easiest to get
engineers to work together. Maybe it's
more like business development teams
that feel the competition. In the cases
where technology stack is slightly
different or even worse when there's
like a researcher statements that
disagree on like what is the fundamental
truth about the future um that's where
there's more space uh for conflict but
that it also means there is more space
for innovation in those cases. Uh, so I
think it's healthy overall for the
ecosystem.
>> I think, um, as we kind of like zoom out
and and wrap up on the interview, um,
one of the things I'm most excited about
again is is this ability for there to be
at the protocol level a way for L2s to
kind of prop up Ethereum because the L2s
receive the benefit of state security
from Ethereum. So creating that kind of
like birectional flow. So in my mind um
like native rollups and the interop
layer are a really big key component
piece to this. Am I kind of like blowing
out of proportion the hope and
opportunity that native roll-ups and EIL
offer or am I kind of like on the right
track?
>> I think it's worth to pay attention to
to native rollups. I think it's it's
worth to believe strongly that this is
uh this is very important path. Uh it's
worth to also be be cautious and
understands that uh even in that world
they all the other L2 structures remain
extremely important. um and based
rollups and native roll-ups and um and a
more traditional structures with VVMs
with nonVM solutions and so look
obviously at the innovation coming from
Tao um look at the world around native
rollups leanium so closer to closer to
Justin Drake and and his vision for the
future we do put a lot of effort on
integrating those different visions and
never discarding them too early giving a
hint of what what we built believe in
but also
also showing some some doubt and space
for for different approaches. Um you
know you have those teams presenting
asynchronous composibility, synchronous
composibility, different approaches to
sequencing, um different approaches to
rollup security. And now when you look a
few years back then you wouldn't be able
to predict exactly how the how the
ecosystem would grow right uh so when
when the zigvms will be ready when the
zigg technology will evolve uh how
difficult it will be to build fraud
proofs how difficult it will be to build
interoperability
uh what will be the challenges with the
base rollups and um and like
preconfirmations the centralization and
so on how you'll sequence the blocks
block building and and we've worked a
lot on this. I I was involved in in many
of the of the designs of blood building
for L2s with flashbots team at the time
uh where at Nanamine we're building a
lots of different structures for
uh for the L2s right so uh and and I was
reading also multiple different
approaches to categorization at some
some point in time like two three years
ago John Sharbono was publishing a lot
of insights into categorization of
roll-ups
That is a difficult topic because it
shows the research and engineering space
at different categories and how you
define the security not only security of
the protocol but also assets. And then
on top of all of this you you look also
at the questions of the fees of the uh
and even if you go beyond technology the
people start talking about alignment.
probably kind of what what voice do
those LTS are using on on Twitter and
then around around technology people
will sometimes take a take a strong
belief oh this is this must be native
rollup and and they'll just question is
will they support native rollup because
they start researching and building it
and supporting teams that build it or
they'll focus on attacking everything
else and I think that the first approach
is is the right one so
uh but everyone has their role you know
like sometimes you have to point out
also the the challenges and uh and holes
and security challenges or maybe that
loss or loss of values like loss of
trustlessness, loss of security that is
potential if you if you go some and uh
so you need a lot of those people to be
to be loud and clear and involved uh
respectful respectful but but I think
>> so I think my second to last question
will be about um Etherealize and the
relationship that EF and the Ethereum
ecosystem system more broadly is
starting to form with traditional
institutions. We see from a regulatory
perspective the US and other regional
jurisdictions becoming more I don't want
to say friendly towards blockchain
crypto but creating clear guidelines for
banks and other traditional financial
institutions to onboard and clearly they
want tokenization. you in your talk at
the bankless summit uh kind of briefly
touched upon Danny Ryan's talk at the de
at dev connect about how institutions
are starting to see the value prop that
blockchains offer. So what does the kind
of vision for the next year or two or
three look like for not necessarily
going out and being in the room with
these guys to onboard them, but for
making it possible from a technological
standpoint to help empower them to
tokenize and come on to blockchain
rails, come on to Ethereum.
>> Yeah, I mean it's it's totally fine to
use the word friendly. They're they're
excited. they they want to see that
future. They understood that future in
many cases. Um yeah, fantastic people
like Laring, Black Rockck looking at the
future of tokenization and seeing
clearly that's that's where it goes.
They build on Ethereum. is uh you have
um I think in Berkeley this year Hester
Pierce was talking about the privacy and
uh and you see now the and polkkins from
SEC talking about the native issuance of
tokenization stocks look they're they're
excited they see the future and like
they're friendly in a way that they they
support the relevant and and security
based innovation and they see that there
is high level of security, there is
trustlessness, there is there's lots of
innovation and there is inevitability of
the future and and they try to
accelerate it because I think that
everyone will benefit from that and
that's what we believed in for a long
time. And so when you say that that the
institutions start to warm up um
sometimes it's just like oh they the
entire society has learned and hence it
allowed to
uh to make changes because everyone
started trusted more the technology the
technology brings like removes the need
for trust right the technology itself
has to be trusted and and as the as that
opening appeared for many institutions
they they've been building innovation
teams uh explorations for blockchain and
so on and uh and gradually
preparing for for these moments and and
now they're just building and they it
just did we learning the same language
gradually and this what Dian Ryan was
talking about that we used to have
different language uh and now we
learning that when we talk about trust
they talk about risk and it's it's like
an inverse like the measure of risk is
almost like invert of the measure of
trust that is required uh the more risky
thing then the more you have to uh trust
the person to remove that risk and
uh or even more you can like everything
quantified
uh yeah so that's what's happening and
I'm I'm great to see because the
institutions represent some some
structure some organization of people
sometimes obviously like we worried that
institutions represent just like a a
very small bunch of shareholders but no
usually they they need to have obviously
the users they need to provide services
and and always always the profit uh in a
in a good market the profit of
institution should be a small small
fraction of the utility that they they
bring to everyone and if they can
deliver the technology then this is this
is how we make Ethereum impactful as
well uh not only for institutions but
also for institutions
>> yeah I mean when you look at like
Vanguard talking about launching ETFs
Vanguard represents American investors
people who go to work day in and day out
and have 401 1ks and they just
contribute to the retirement earnings.
They're not all these institutions are
are evil for-profit corporations that we
can easily kind of like slap the sticker
on and and and categorize them as. So,
um, wrapping up, the last question I
want to ask you, and it's always hard to
kind of define where we're going next
and and what's happening next, but as
you're kind of going through
compensation packages for the year and
you're doing your year-end budgets,
what's kind of the the driving focus for
for 2026? How how do you see the
Ethereum Foundation building off of the
successes of this year and continuing to
to work on what works and maybe uh
steering the ship and and and correcting
course in in areas that aren't
necessarily going the way you want.
>> So foundation talks about talks and and
works on community values of the privacy
open source censorship resistance
security. uh so it will be important to
understand how different aspects tracks
of protocol efforts of the foundation
relate to those. So you have the very
significant and talented privacy team
around 50 people with multiple very
impactful projects and they they work on
privacy of reads, rights, privacy of the
proving and allowing to to integrate
like the ZK systems with the privacy. Uh
so so we expect a lot of impact there.
We already see a lot of uh new new
approach applications that are driven by
eigorinoit
the privacy cluster at the foundation.
Then you have uh then you have the
security aspect. So trillion dollar
security gets uh increased budgets for
next year. Uh more effort to coordinate
to to implement solutions that make
Ethereum even safer. Uh well I mean
obviously we we understand all the
challenges of the of the hacks of the
challenges of the smart contracts but we
say even safer as Etherum is definitely
like the the top safety uh like top
safety place on the blockchain space
where where people really spend um
countless time on the on verification of
every single upgrade with five clients
on each side execution layer consensus
layer and and you have like thousands of
hours if thousands of security
researchers looking at everything. We
want to push it much much farther. And
uh the other thing is on the censorship
resistance side, we have teams working
on on fossil and uh other solutions that
uh then improve the fur access to the
markets and to the blockchain
and uh
well open source wise. So for example,
we implemented that into our uh our
policies around treasury. So we'll be
really putting a lot of pressure on the
protocols that are not fully open source
and free license and deploying uh D5
protocols on chain. Uh so these are the
the main areas around the values and on
top of it obviously there's lots of uh
impact related work on the ecosystem
development and uh top quality
engineering will be improving further
scaling uh so scaling will be will
continue being a focus area. So scaling
with everything else in mind.
>> Amazing. Well, Tomas, thank you so much
for taking the time out of your super
hectic schedule in a late time zone in
the world right now. Um, I really
appreciate the the time you gave to the
Smart Economy podcast and um, like I
said, I've been looking forward to this
interview um, going back to to when you
and Shaw first took reigns over the EF.
So, um, thank you so much for for giving
an hour of your time to us. I really
appreciate it.
>> So, it was such a pleasure. Yeah, it was
lots of great questions and a good vibe
and it's a good time to really talk
about uh the summary of this year and
the the next year, the future.
>> Awesome. Well, when people are hearing
this, it will be the middle of January.
So, hopefully you all have something to
look forward to coming from the the EF
for for the coming year.
>> Thank you. And uh well, happy new year
to everyone.
>> Happy New Year. Cheers. Thank you so
much for tuning in to the Smart Economy
podcast. To stay in the loop with all of
our latest episodes and insights, head
over to www.smarteconom
smarteconomyodcast.com
and don't forget to subscribe to our
YouTube channel for all of our video
content. If you enjoyed today's
discussion, please show your support by
liking, commenting, and reviewing this
episode on your favorite podcasting
platform. Your feedback helps us reach
more listeners and bring even better
content your way. We'd also love to hear
from you. So, please drop a comment on
Spotify or YouTube to share what topics
you'd like us to cover or who you'd like
to see as our next guest. And if you or
someone you know would make for a great
guest, please reach out. We're always on
the hunt for fresh voices and new
perspectives.
And lastly, for our NEO token holders
out there, please consider voting for
NEO news today as your council
representative. We've proudly been
serving the NEO ecosystem since 2017 and
we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our council rewards directly
back into ecosystem growth initiatives.
Once again, thank you so much for
listening to the Smart Economy podcast
and we look forward to catching you next
time.